The lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is the most researched battery system nowadays.LIBs, since its commercialization in the 1990s, provides better gravimetric/volumetricenergy density, higher voltage, and cycle life with lower self-discharge than previouslydeveloped battery systems. All those advantages made the LIB systems an excellentcandidate as the power source for portable electronic devices, electric-powered vehicles,space vehicles, electricity grid storage, and future electric aviation.However, there is a limitation to developing higher-capacity lithium-ion batteriesas we approach the practical limit of the presently used cathodes which makes today’s high-energy LIBs. Moreover, small-form factor portable electric devices and large-scaleapplications of LIB systems for electric vehicles, space vehicles, electric and hybridaircraft, and grid storage are all facing challenges of lower than required safety level intoday’s LIBs. Thus, developing new technologies and components of batteries with higherenergy density and safety levels is the most desirable research & development topic. In thiscase, the lithium-sulfur battery (LSB) system is an excellent candidate for increasing thebattery system's energy, beyond the energy storage limit of today’s LIBs. With ~650 Whkg-1 of gravimetric energy density, Li-S battery (LSB) achieved more than two times theenergy density of a state-of-art LIBs (~250 Wh kg-1).Organic liquid electrolyte (OLE) is one of the essential components in the LIBs dueto its high ionic conductivity (10-2-10-1 S cm-1) and electrode wettability at ambientconditions. As the temperature rises, the lack of thermal stability and high flammability ofOLEs becomes a significant challenge in designing a safe operable LIBs. Even amoderately elevated temperature (>65°C) can severely diminish the useful capacity andcycle life and can pose thermal safety issues (such as fire and explosions). Pursuing saferelectrolytes led battery researchers, and manufacturers around the globe to a significanttask in developing a high-conductivity, thermally-stable solid-state electrolyte (SE).Depending of material selection (polymer or inorganic ceramics or polymer-ceramiccomposite), the solid electrolyte can be incombustible, nonvolatile, nonflammable, andstable at elevated temperatures. Combining the concept of LSB (high energy) and SE(enhanced safety), researchers introduced high energy density, high safety all-solid-statebatteries, particularly all-solid-state lithium metal batteries.My research involves understanding the performance and safety behavior of next-generation, high-energy, high-safety all-solid-state lithium batteries, including LSB andLIBs. In my study, we experimented with sulfur-infused carbon as high-capacity cathodematerials. We infused the sulfur at different temperatures. We utilized carbon cloth,activated carbon on carbon cloth, and hierarchical porous carbon on carbon cloth assubstrate. The cathodes were tested in the baseline liquid electrolyte-based lithium-sulfurbattery.To increase the safety of the lithium-sulfur battery, we synthesized different solidelectrolytes based on sulfides, such as lithium phosphorous sulfur bromine iodine (LPSBI)and lithium phosphorous sulfur chlorine (LPSCl). The selection of these Li+ conductingsulfides was based on different useful properties such as i) high Li+ conductivity, ii) highinterfacial stability with lithium anodes, and iii) high compressibility required for cellfabrication at room temperature.For the synthesis of Li+ conducting sulfide solid electrolyte, we have developed ascalable synthesis route that includes material sintering in a furnace in an Ar glovebox andeliminated the risk of letting the material contact with air compared to the state-of-the-artprocedure that involves sintering the materials in a volume constraint quartz tube.Learned the challenges of state of the art rechargeable and primary LSBs. For thefirst time, we constructed and studied the performance of sulfide SE-based primary (non-rechargeable) LSBs. My research suggests that the future research should addressoptimizing i) sulfur cathode loading, ii) stack pressure, iii) electrode kinetics to make solid-state lithium-sulfur a secondary battery.The lithium (Li) anode can undergo infinite volume change during charge dischargeof LSBs. For example, if one starts with a Li thickness of 100 μm, during dischargethickness of the Li anode can vary from 100 μm to 0. This kind of Li volume change,especially when using SEs makes the pressure applied on the battery critical. Without aproper pressure the connectivity of LSB components (viz., anode, electrolyte and cathode)will falter and make the battery dysfunctional. Thus, understanding the effect of pressureon the battery plays an important role in solid-state LSBs. So we studied the effect ofpressure on lithium deposition (charge) and strapping (discharge) against an importantsulfide SE (Lithium Phosphorus Sulfur Bromine Iodide, LPSBI). We adopted a uniquecharge/discharge protocol using asymmetric cell configuration and determined themaximum allowed stripping and deposition current density at various pressures. Thisresearch will facilitate future progress on rechargeable solid-state LSBs and otherrechargeable solid-state LIBs.Finally, my research focused on understanding the safety (thermal, electrochemical,and environmental) of sulfide SE-based all-solid-state LIBs using high voltage cathode(lithium cobalt oxide, LiCoO2 and low voltage anode (graphite, C). Thermal safety hasbeen evaluated using Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and electrical safety bymonitoring the open circuit voltage of a fully charged battery at different temperatures upto 170°C. Environmental safety has been evaluated by measuring the quantity of releasedH2S gas. The thermal, electrochemical, and environmental safety data obtained on sulfideSE-based all-solid-state LIBs has been found superior to commercial-type organic LEbased LIBs.
